When you ask AI to answer a question,
generate an image, or write a line of
code, somewhere a machine kicks into
gear.
A neural network of high performance
computing in data centers that consume
huge swaths of land.
There are now thousands of them around
the world, and they're getting harder to
sustain.
These AI data centers just require an
enormous amount of power in order to run
them, also to cool them. And so they've
essentially hit what is an energy wall.
And yet demand keeps accelerating.
Globally, electricity use for data
centers is expected to double by 2030.
By 2050, it will likely represent a
tenth of all electricity consumed on
Earth.
Some forecasts suggest that over just
the next 3 years alone, we will need an
additional 50 to 100 gaw of new energy
or new data center capacity just in
North America alone. For context, one
nuclear power station is about a gawatt.
So you'd be looking at 50 to 100 new
nuclear projects in the US.
>> So what happens when artificial
intelligence outpaces the power and land
needed to sustain it?
3 2 1
>> The answer may be above Earth
for power and lift off.
>> In late 2025, space startup StarCloud
sent a satellite into orbit carrying an
NVIDIA H100 chip. The most powerful
processor ever deployed in space.
>> StarCloud one separation confirmed.
>> A machine only the size of a small
fridge representing a big ambition
to move data centers off Earth.
Until we launched StarCloud 1, people
thought that you couldn't run earthbased
terrestrial state-of-the-art GPUs or AI
chips in space. So, we did a lot of
engineering work both around the thermal
system and around the radiation
tolerance and shielding in order to make
these chips work in space.
This is the Starcloud 1 satellite. So,
you can see here we're just flying over
Africa. It takes about 90 minutes to
orbit the globe once.
>> StarCloud 1 is not a data center. Not
yet. It's a single prototype in orbit.
The future that StarCloud imagines is
tens of thousands of satellites, each
carrying chips like this one, working
together to do complex large scale
computing in space, also known as
orbital compute.
For many, the vision begins with a
prompt from Earth beamed into space
through laser links. The request is then
processed by AI chips inside a satellite
bus, which is powered by massive solar
arrays stretching as much as four square
kilm. Together, these satellites form a
linked computing network that then sends
results back to Earth in milliseconds.
Two years ago when we first started
talking about building data centers in
space, people, you know, frankly thought
we were a bit crazy. And it does sound a
little bit sci-fi.
>> What sounds like sci-fi is a response to
a very real problem.
On Earth, data centers require vast
amounts of land, water, and electricity.
And as the AI systems inside them grow
more powerful, the heat they generate is
becoming harder and costlier to contain.
In space, on the other hand, there are
no land constraints or permitting
battles, not to mention access to almost
unlimited solar energy if it can be made
to work.
It's still very much in development and
theoretical at the moment. There are
certainly a lot of engineering
challenges that will come with operating
data centers in space. The solar panels
that are going to be needed for these
data centers are going to be massive and
we just don't have the experience with
operating solar panels of that size in
space.
At Nanyang Technological University in
Singapore, where the idea of an AI chip
in space is also being tested,
researchers are working on a solution
for exactly that.
We need to be able to launch the solar
panel in in a small uh configuration so
that when we reach space, we can deploy
it to cover as much as possible of the
area.
>> As part of Singapore's space technology
development program, the university is
testing a new type of solar cell that
could do this. Unlike most siliconbased
solar panels, this one is made from a
material called perovskite, which is
cheaper, lighter, and flexible enough to
be rolled up for launch and unfurled in
orbit.
It's a chemical ink coated onto a
surface, then crystallized in a vacuum
to become a solar cell.
But the challenges don't stop there. The
panels will need to track the sun at all
times to maximize absorption. And with
all those extra machines in space, it's
becoming far more crowded.
The team at NTU is testing a low power
propulsion system that could give small
satellites the ability to adjust their
orbit and avoid collisions.
Then comes the question of thermal
management. with no air or water to
carry away heat in the vacuum of space.
>> You want to make sure that they have a
way to pull heat away from the computer.
And so you'll need radiators on your
spacecraft as well. It's kind of a
complicated dance of all of these
different engineering marvels that
you'll need to perfect in order for them
to work.
Every part of that dance depends on
communication. For this to really work,
satellites will need to transmit
enormous amounts of data across orbit
and back to Earth.
Like StarCloud, Singaporean startup
Transelestial believes lasers beamed
from rooftop ground stations like this
one are the answer.
On Earth, 99% of the data that we send
and receive goes through undersea
cables. Um, however, in space, we don't
have that luxury. So, essentially, what
we're doing is using the same laser that
we have inside a fiber optic cable,
taking it out and sending it through
free space. So that can go from one
satellite to another satellite or in
other words inter satellite links or we
could also have them go from a satellite
to the ground
>> with over a,000 times more bandwidth
compared to the traditional radio
frequency communication systems. Laser
links could become the connective tissue
of an orbital internet.
>> When it comes to interstatellite links,
you're basically connecting through
vacuum. There's no air, there's no rain,
there's no clouds, there's no
environment that can block your links.
So lasers are actually a very natural
fit for inter satellite links.
>> Transelestial's long-term vision is
something they call the ring, a
constellation of approximately 40
satellites that is sitting around the
Earth's equator. As we grow and this
technology becomes more and more
accessible, I can imagine at some point
in the future, a lot of day-to-day users
will be having their information sent
and received via laser links to data
centers in space, being processed there,
and getting their information back to
the ground.
But perhaps the biggest obstacle of all,
as it's been since the dawn of global
space exploration, is the cost of
getting there.
Partially reusable rockets like SpaceX's
Falcon 9 have changed the economics of
reaching orbit entirely.
>> 3 2 1 liftoff of the Falcon 9.
SpaceX has really led the way in terms
of bringing reusable rockets to the
market with their Falcon 9 rocket, but
it's only a partially reusable rocket.
With Starship, they're trying to move
just a step further. What SpaceX has
been trying to achieve is a rocket that
can go all the way to space, deploy
satellites into orbit, and then come
back and land intact and need minimal
refurbishing before it can launch again.
>> That can dramatically lower the cost of
launch by potentially 50 or 100 times.
We see that break even cost to be around
$500 a kilo. The Starship launch
vehicle, which is coming online over the
coming years, is designed to produce
launch costs of between $10 to $20 a
kilo.
>> In fact, SpaceX has plans to launch its
own data centers in space.
>> The company has declared that they're
going to put up to a million satellites
into space for this AI data center
project. But they're not the only ones
that are talking about this. Blue
Origin, which is helmed by Jeff Bezos,
has also discussed uh making data
centers. Then you also have other space
startups like Axiom Space, Relativity
Space. This is definitely something that
has caught the attention of the space
community.
>> Another player taking a different
approach is China. Its focus is more
immediate.
a precursor to space-based data centers
known as edge computing where satellite
imagery for example is processed and
filtered in orbit instead of sending all
that raw data back to Earth.
>> China is is taking the lead on that uh
through the threebody computing
constellation. China has launched 12
satellites out of a plan 2800.
Not only will these supercomputers have
as much computing power as what you see
on Earth, but in many ways some estimate
600 times more once those 2,800
competing satellites are actually
completed.
>> It is not a data center in space, but it
is a step towards one. And unlike the
US's privately approach, China's is
already funded, mandated, and written
international policy.
China is in a race with us to sort of
lead in in AI.
AI is basically the future of not just
technology but the future of the economy
and China wants to be the forefront of
that.
>> What's more, experts say space-based
data centers could in theory give
militaries an edge in conflict beyond
the reach of physical and cyber attacks
on Earth.
It's all about self-sufficiency and
technological self-reliance and national
security.
>> The Chinese are actually moving
incredibly rapidly and so it is
extremely critical if the US wants to be
competitive that they move fast on
building large clusters of computing
space in order to be able to serve other
satellites.
>> The stakes go beyond technology. Experts
say whoever builds this infrastructure
first doesn't just win a race. They may
decide who controls the next internet.
StarCloud alone has filed with the FCC
to put 88,000 satellites into orbit and
operators from around the world have
proposed millions more.
>> We're really at the beginning of a
golden age uh in the space industry.
People have realized, okay, there are
real profitable businesses that are
going to be built in space. And that's
really drawn in a lot of this new
interest.
Will we have a moment in the future
where there will be no data centers on
the ground at all? I don't think that
will happen anytime soon. But um as we
make progress in space technology, I
think we'll see more and more data
centers slowly shifting into space.
>> We're still at the very early days of a
market that to be honest didn't even
exist a few years ago.
When you ask AI to answer a question,
somewhere a machine springs into action.
For now, that machine is on Earth. The
question is, for how much longer?